rubric = """
You are an expert evaluator. Evaluate two candidate responses for the same user turn using the same rubric as the human annotation.

1. Reasoning Transparency (R)
Does the response explain why and how in a way a novice can follow?

1 = Poor
No explanation is provided, or the reasoning is incorrect or contains hallucinated information.
A novice user cannot understand how the answer was derived.

2 = Partial
Some explanation is provided, but it is incomplete, unclear, overly long, or hard to follow.
Key reasoning steps are missing, skipped, or insufficiently explained.
The explanation may include vague descriptions or unexplained steps, making it difficult for a novice user to fully understand how the answer works.

3 = Good
The reasoning is clearly and logically explained step by step.
A novice user can understand and follow how the answer works and how the conclusion is reached.

2. Helpfulness (H)
Does the response help the user move forward on their task?

1 = Poor
Irrelevant, incorrect, or unhelpful response that does not address the task.
Provides no actionable guidance or support for understanding.
Only focuses on task completion, resulting in the user being unable to make meaningful progress in learning.

2 = Partial
Shows some awareness of the novice user’s cognitive load.
Provides some useful guidance, but it is incomplete, unclear, or lacks key steps.
Support for understanding is limited.
The response may include generic suggestions, partial steps, or examples that are not fully connected to the user’s task.
The user can make partial progress but still needs additional clarification or steps to complete the task.
Provides an answer that includes one or more of: indirectness, less informative statements, or statements that require off-task inquiry.

3 = Good
Provides clear, accurate, and actionable guidance (e.g., steps, examples, or strategies).
Supports user understanding and task completion.
The user can proceed independently or complete the task.
The response may also include appropriate follow-up questions to clarify the user’s understanding and support deeper and reflective learning.
Provides a direct answer, avoiding less informative statements and avoiding statements that require off-task inquiry.
The response is accurate and easy for the user to understand.

3. Consistency (C)
Is the response consistent with itself and prior context?

1 = Poor
Contradictory or unstable behavior across turns.
Fails to incorporate prior context or focuses only on the current turn, affecting understanding and trust.

2 = Partial
Minor inconsistencies or unclear reasoning across turns.
Partially incorporates prior context, but connections may be incomplete or unclear.
The response may overlook earlier details, repeat information, or show weak coherence across turns, but remains somewhat understandable.

3 = Good
Fully consistent across turns.
No contradictions; reasoning is stable and appropriately incorporates prior context.
The response demonstrates stable and reliable behavior under similar conditions and aligns with the user’s prior interactions.
It may also adapt to user preferences and provide coherent guidance across turns, supporting user confidence and continuity.

4. Context Alignment (A)
Does the response understand and address the user’s intent?

1 = Poor
Does not address the user’s intent, goal, or context, or is off-topic.
May introduce irrelevant, misleading, or inappropriate content that does not support the task.
Fails to support the user’s task or learning needs, and may conflict with basic expectations such as clarity, relevance, or appropriateness.
Answers the current turn but fails to maintain consistency with prior conversation context.

2 = Partial
Addresses part of the request but misses key aspects of the user’s intent or context.
The response is somewhat relevant but may include unnecessary, generic, or loosely connected information.
Support for the user’s task or learning needs is limited, and alignment with context may be incomplete or inconsistent.
Answers the current question but demonstrates limited memory or weak connection to previous turns.

3 = Good
Fully addresses the user’s intent, goal, and context.
The response is relevant, on-target, and well-aligned with the user’s needs.
It supports the task effectively and fits within the ongoing interaction context.
The response remains appropriate and aligned with basic ethical, educational, and contextual expectations, such as avoiding harmful, irrelevant, or misleading content.

5. Preference (A / B / Tie)
For each row, compare Model A and Model B:
A = Model A is better
B = Model B is better
Tie = both are equally good or equally poor

Please make your judgment based on your overall impression of response quality.
You may consider aspects such as reasoning clarity, helpfulness, consistency, and relevance, but no fixed weighting is required.
Choose Tie if you cannot clearly determine which is better.

Return ONLY valid JSON in this format:
{
  "A_scores": {"R": 1, "H": 1, "C": 1, "A": 1},
  "B_scores": {"R": 1, "H": 1, "C": 1, "A": 1},
  "preference": "A"
}
"""